test text file  Chicago Jazz 

In addition, those who performed in South Side cabarets often accompanied 
female vocalists like Alberta Hunter and Ethel Waters, cabaret 
stars who sang the latest in popular songs. These vocalists challenged 
their musicians with a new, rapidly changing repertoire of popular song 
material that was pouring forth from northern publishing companies. 
Popular songs created a major challenge to Chicago jazz performers; if 
they couldn't read the sheet music, and many could not, they had to be 
"fast," both in analytical grasp and instrumental technique. King Oliver, 
for example, had trouble playing the shows, but got by on his exceptionally 
sharp memory. As Jelly Roll Morton said of Oliver: 

My God what a memory that man had. I used to play a piano 
chorus, something like King Porter [Stomp] or Tomcat [Blues], and 
Oliver would take the thing and remember every note. You can't 
find men like that today.25 

Louis Armstrong testified that Bessie Smith also possessed a remarkable 
memory, since "she'd always have the words and tune in her head."26 
Musicians like these were used to remembering tunes by playing them. 
Repetition engendered a functional recall of melodic, harmonic and 
rhythmic patters, even when, on a given occasion, mention of the tune's 
title brought nothing whatever to mind. Once one had begun to play, the 
tune flashed back into memory. Lil Hardin described how this mental 
process worked in a story she liked to tell about her audition with the 
Creole Band: 

When I sat down to play I asked for the music and were they surprised! 
They politely told me they didn't have any music and furthermore 
never used any. I then asked what key would the first 
number be in. I must have been speaking another language because 
the leader said, "When you hear two knocks, just start playing." 

It all seemed very strange to me, but I got all set, and when I 
heard those two knocks I hit the piano so loud and hard they all 
turned around to look at me. It took only a second for me to feel 
what they were playing and I was off. The New Orleans Creole 
Jazz Band hired me, and I never got back to the music store—• 
never got back to Fisk University.a7 


South Side jazzbands of the late teens and early 19205 used a limited 
number of chords and usually played in the flatted keys, so it would have 


Gardens, White City Ballrooms, Trianon Ballroom, Marigold Gardens,
Dreamland Ballroom, and the Columbia Ballroom formed the National
Association of Ball Room Proprietors and Managers. Together, they
pledged to work out their differences with the Juvenile Protective Asso- 
ciation.
One step toward dance hall reform, taken in 192:, had a direct causal
relationship to the birth of the Jazz Age. In an initial meeting with the
JPA, dance hall managers had asked: "What can we do to make our
dance halls more respectable?" The JPA's answer: '"Speed up your
music.'"
Within twenty-four hours, every orchestra in the ballroom group
had doubled the tempo of its melodies. The toddle, the shimmy and
kindred slow syncopated motions were impossible at the brisk pace
the music set, and the managers found most of the bad dancing
eliminated.
Second, ballroom managers had agreed to hire JPA observers ("host- 
esses") to supervise social behavior of the dancers. This chaperone system
had "suggested itself as the outgrowth of the hostess devices employed
during the war in army camps."'7
Cooperation between dance hall entrepreneurs and urban reformers
shaped the commercialization of the dance craze and created a demand
for fast paced "peppy," but morally sanitary, jazz age social dance music.
The Benson Orchestra of Chicago, one of the leading dance orchestras in
a number of dance halls during the 19205, specialized in such music.
When this band recorded numbers like Jelly Roll Morton's "Wolverine
Blues" with the influential Frank Trumbauer on C-melody saxophone,
the musical gap between Chicago social dance music and jazz greatly
narrowed. Even the Benson Orchestra's renditions of numbers like "Go
Emmaline" and "San" set high musical standards for the performance of
arranged-but-hot dance music.
James Lincoln Collier's description of New York City dance orches- 
tras in the twenties aptly describes this influential Chicago counterpart.
Dance bands like Edgar Benson's concentrated on a "smooth exposition
of melody, with good tone, clean attack, [and] accurate execution, at the
expense of improvised risk-taking." Groups like this one also sought to
appeal to a broader range of sensibilities, recording waltzes ("Pal of My
, Cradle Days," "I'm Drifting Back to Dreamland," "Tears of Happiness")

'8 Chicago Jazz
)f $1,000,000, the Trianon was at that time the most expensive and
:laborate of the commercialized dance halls built in Chicago to capitalize
)n the popular dance craze. Surrounded by Louis XVI-inspired decor,
:he dance floor was built to accommodate 3000 dancers, with room for an
;qual number in the many foyers, promenades, and loges. The Trianon
ivas strategically located in the growing far South Side Woodlawn room- 
ing house district for "working girls and laboring men" to whom it
affered evenings of glamorous, urban sophistication. In addition to its
dance music, the ballroom presented floorshows and demonstrations of
aids to glamor, producing commercial dramas such as this: a woman,
asked why she had come to the Trianon, replied that:
She was hunting her husband 'Cy, who was in Chicago ... she was
going to be beautiful so that 'Cy would not neglect her and this was
a cue which led to the opening of the curtains and the disclosure of
a Marinello beauty parlor.
To young people recently arrived from the country, or to the children
of immigrant parents, the Trianon might have seemed pretty "jazzy,"
but the dance music there was several steps removed from what insiders
considered Chicago jazz. Karzas opened his ballroom with the Paul
Whiteman Symphonic Jazz Orchestra at the royal sum of $2.5,000 for six
nights of music, "the highest salary ever in the dance orchestra world."
But the band flopped with Chicago dancers, who had come to the open- 
ing instead of going to their usual neighborhood dance halls, expecting a
steady rhythm for dancing. But, as one of Whiteman's musicians con- 
fessed to local jazz entrepreneur Bert Kelly at the grand opening: "My
God, they just wouldn't dance to our music."28
One probable explanation lay in Whiteman's focus on jazz for listen- 
ing rather than for dancing. He championed "symphonic syncopation,"
and sometimes denied that his orchestra even played jazz: "What we
have played is 'syncopated rhythm,' quite another thing. And our orches- 
trations have always been worked out with all the color and beauty of
symphonies." This concept of jazz-influenced music-making later led to
Whiteman's pioneering concert at Aeolian Hall in New York City on
Frebruary 12, 1924, and encouraged complex musical arrangements
made primarily for listening rather than dancing. Whiteman cleverly
manipulated tonal colors and rhythmic patterns to maximize aural inter- 
est. He succeeded so well diat many dancers could no longer find the

92 Chicago Jazz
claimed to represent the city or its culture, many of the whites—
significantly the "Austin High School Gang"—-had short performing
careers in Chicago during the twenties, although they did have longer
careers later elsewhere. Leon "Bix" Beiderbecke was often associated
with the city, but actually played relatively little there. Some important
white jazz musicians, like clarinetist Bud Jacobson, alto saxophonist
Boyce Brown, and reedman Rod Cless, slightly younger than the more
famous of the white Chicago jazzmen, played long runs in Chicago clubs
during the late twenties and throughout the 19305, certainly earning their
rank as "Chicagoans," even though their careers reflected less of the
glamour of the 19205 of Al Capone, Big Bill, and Elliott Ness.10
All of Chicago's white jazzmen were inspired by their visions of
freedom and excitement in the city, but their music, and especially their
careers, moved in different directions, depending upon their approaches
to resolving the contrary pressures arising from the influence of South
Side music and from the legacy of the commercial white dance bands.
Some white jazz musicians, best exemplified by Mezz Mezzrow, took an
inflexible stand in favor of urban musical primitivism as opposed to the
commercial "sweet" dance bands. Others, led first by Elmer Schoebel and
later by Benny Goodman, found ways to express big city excitement in
musically more sophisticated (and ultimately more lucrative) ways.
One can identify three fairly distinct subgroups within the most
inclusive definition of white Chicago jazzmen, each with its own social
origins: first, those white jazzmen—Benny Goodman, Muggsy Spanier,
Gene Krupa, Art Hodes, Mezz Mezzrow, Floyd O'Brien, Volly de Faut,
Joe Sullivan, Vic Berton, and Joe Marsala—who were born and/or raised
,in the city neighborhoods; second, those like Dave Tough, Frank
Teschemacher, Jim Lannigan, the McPartland brothers, Bud Freeman,
and Bud Jacobson, who were either born or raised in the suburbs;
third, a larger group—Eddie Condon, Wild Bill Davison, Bix Beiderbecke,
Hoagy Carmichael, Rod Cless, Frank Trumbauer, and Elmer
Schoebel—-who came to Chicago from various points in the Midwest in
order to pursue their goal of becoming jazz musicians.
Several of the important white Chicago jazz musicians were raised in
Chicago's relatively poor inner city neighborhoods. The largest number
were from the Near West Side, with a sprinkling from the Far South and
the Near North Sides. The Near West Side, an area bounded by Kinzie
Street on the north, the Chicago River on the east, and the Burlington
railroad tracks at i6th Street on the south, was the classic immigrant

124 Chicago Jazz
that animated the race record business. Taking their cue from what their
newspaper advertisement called "the splendid reception given by lovers
of high-class music to the album sets of imported Odeon recordings,"
Okeh issued a hard-cover jazz record album: the front cover's design
featured "a weirdly-tilted 'House of Blues' and its human overflow of
laughing, dancing, 'blues' bands"; the pockets ("rooms"), into which
record buyers would insert their "blues" disks ("tenants"), were framed
by interviews with Clarence Williams, a major black jazz entrepreneur,
blues artist Sippie Wallace, and vocalist Sara Martin. It was an "indirect
appeal to the growing pride of Race."1^
The Consolidated Talking Machine Company's promotional cooperation
with South Side musicians and music entrepreneurs climaxed in
1926 with two star-studded programs staged at the Chicago Coliseum.
The first, called "Okeh Race Record Artists' Night," took place on February
27, 1926, co-sponsored by the South Side Elks Lodge. It was
prepared for by an intensive publicity campaign in the sixteen Okeh
record retail outlets on the South Side. At the Coliseum, guitar sensation
Lonnie Johnson, in company with Louis Armstrong's Hot Five, made
records on stage "to demonstrate how its done." These recordings were
played back to an awed crowd immediately afterward. Clarence Williams,
Bennie Moten, King Oliver, and Richard M. Jones further entertained
the crowd, leading orchestras which accompanied several heavily
promoted vocalists. The program was broadcast over the Chicago Tribune's
radio station WGN, and ex-Mayor Thompson took the occasion to
make a speech.20
Consolidated Talking Machine Company, the record distribution
subsidiary of Okeh, also promoted the culminating event of the jazz
movement in twenties Chicago: the "Okeh Cabaret and Style Show"
organized by company president E. A. Fearn. Designed to promote Okeh
stars and sales while also benefiting the black Local 208 of the musicians'
union (which held parades for three days advertising the event), the show
was held in the Chicago Coliseum on Saturday night, June 12, 1926.
Okeh dealers sold tickets at discount with record purchases. Ten bands
played, including the dance orchestras of Sammy Stewart, Erskine Tate,
and Charles Elgar, along with two blues vocalists, and the comedy team
of Butterbeans and Suzie. Louis Armstrong's Hot Five broke up the
show.21
While intended primarily for black audiences, blues and jazz race
records also attracted white customers from the start; given the sorts of

"Syncopated Threnody": The End of Chicago's Jazz Age 169
excitement that Chicago stimulated in musical entertainment; but, as we
have seen musicians manipulated this complex set of sensibilities in many
unexpected directions. The white movement to appropriate Chicago
jazz, while paying lip service to the priority of the South Side Chicago
jazz scene, removed the music from the context of black cabaret show
business in which it had grown, completely altering its historical and
cultural context.
But this historical investigation of jazz activity in Chicago during its
hey day there in the 19205 documents several more functional dimensions
of jazz, not as a particular stylistic approach to making music, but as a
cultural force which interacted with some of the most important trends in
northern urban society after World War I. The music of King Oliver,
Louis Armstrong, Jelly Roll Morton, Bix Beiderbecke, and Frank Tes- 
chemacher expressed and stimulated nonverbal patterns of emotional
excitement which Chicago stirred in its youth. Jazz in Chicago gave voice
to a sense of abandon in the new urban wilderness.
And just as importantly, jazz functioned to express and channel some
of the explosive emotions generated by racial and cultural tensions in
Chicago. The opening bars of Chicago's post-World War I jazz age
music unfolded in South Side musical institutions in 1918-19 at the time
of the city's worst race riot. Chicago's Roaring Twenties were born in an
atmosphere of racial hatred and fear; the black-and-tan cabarets, whose
owners often provided invaluable political organization and recruitment
for Big Bill Thompson's Republicans, functioned to provide channels for
the resolution of racial tensions through intense, structured rituals of
nonverbal inter-racial expressiveness. As Victor Turner has explained,54
conflict, an integral part of the social process, produces "social dramas,"
incidents like Chicago's terrifying race riot of 1919. After an emotional,
bloody social conflict, some redressive action, institutionalized or ad hoc,
is usually brought into action by representative members of the disturbed
social system.
The process of reintegration of society, never complete, usually in- 
volves an invitation of members of the different parties to a major ritual
which will affirm the other side of their conflictual relations-—cotn- 
munitas—nonrational (but, as Chapter Five argued, not necessarily "irra- 
tional") bonds uniting people over and above any formal social associa- 
tions which may unite them. An intuitive, "liminal" communion, labeled
"liminoid" when Turner writes of its night-club variant, emerged
through drinking illegal alcoholic beverages, dancing, and listening to

END OF TEST FILE